docs/reference/sdks/index.md, before:

title: Overview
Algorand maintains SDK support in [JavaScript](https://github.com/algorand/java-algorand-sdk), [Python](https://github.com/algorand/py-algorand-sdk), [Java](https://github.com/algorand/java-algorand-sdk) and [Go](https://github.com/algorand/go-algorand-sdk). Additionally, [Community Provided SDKs](../../community/#sdks) expand the development reach. These SDKs offer both standalone and network connected development functionality. The standalone functionality includes the ability to work with accounts managed within your application and to construct offline transactions. This includes the creation, signing and appending of signatures to transactions prior to broadcast. Supported signatures types include single account, multisignatures and logic signatures. Each SDK implements a client which connects to various [REST endpoints](TODO:$REST_LANDING_PAGE) for interfacing with blockchain state, transactions and applications. This provides the ability to broadcast a signed transaction, compile a TEAL program and query the blockchain for historical data.

Examples using the supported SDKs are provided throughout the developer portal. Additional developer reference documentation is described below.

!!! info
    All examples on this page assume the data directory is ~/node/data

# REST Endpoints
Integration with the Algorand protocol daemon (`algod`), Algorand key management daemon (`kmd`) or Algorand Indexer daemon (`algorand-indexer`) is provided using a set of [REST APIs](TODO:$REST_LANDING_PAGE). These APIs are described using the [Open API Specification version 2 (OAS 2)](https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/blob/master/versions/2.0.md). The `algod` and `kmd` daemons serve their respective API from the _address:port_ defined within the _algod.net_ and _kmd.net_ files found in the _~/node/data_ and _~/node/data/kmd-{version}_ directories. The `algorand-indexer` daemon provides its API from the _host:port_ defined by the _--server_ flag specified at start up. Each daemon provides its API specification in a swagger json format available from this endpoint: 

Algorand Protocol Daemon (`algod`)

```
curl http://$(cat ~/node/data/algod.net)/swagger.json
```

Algorand Key Management Daemon (`kmd`)

```
curl http://$(cat ~/node/data/kmd-v0.5/kmd.net)/swagger.json
```

!!! info
    The `kmd` daemon is only automatically started when using the `goal` command line tool with specific commands requiring key management access. Also, this daemon timeout after 60 seconds being idle. If you require API access to `kmd` you will need to manually start the process with `goal` using the command: `goal kmd start -d <data-dir>`.

Algorand Indexer (`algorand-indexer`)

```
curl http://{host:port}/swagger.json # TODO: This endpoint is not implemented
```

!!! info
    All REST methods and models are fully described within [reference documentation](TODO:$REST_LANDING_PAGE). 


# Security Token
Most REST calls will also require an API token header to authenticate with the API server. For both `algod` and `kmd` the token is automatically generated by the daemon at startup and stored in a file. `algod` places _algod.token_ in the _~/node/data_ directory. `kmd` places _kmd.token_ the _~/node/data/kmd-{version}_ directory. Security tokens can be regenerated for both using the `goal node generatetoken` command. The `algorand-indexer` daemon allows configuration of the security token at startup using the _--token_ flag and specifying a value. 

| Daemon             | Header Identifier   | Header Value Defined Via                      |
| ------------------ | ------------------- | --------------------------------------------- |
| `algod`            | X-Algo-API-Token    | file: ~/node/data/algod.token                 |
| `kmd`              | X-KMD-API-Token     | file: ~/node/data/kmd-{version}/kmd.token     |
| `algorand-indexer` | X-Indexer-API-Token | flag: --token {your_value_here}               |

Each SDKs provides a method for setting these headers. Most REST tools provide a method for setting additional headers. To set the header with a `curl` command use the `-H` parameter. For example, to make a call to retrieve a specific block, use the following curl command:

```
curl http://$(cat ~/node/algod.net)/v2/blocks/31538 -H "X-Algo-API-Token: $(cat ~/node/data/algod.token)"
```

In the above example, the block information will be displayed if the block exists on the local node. If the node is a non-Archival node, older blocks will not be available.
TODO: Consider replacing above example with /v2/status as will always return relevant data

# JavaScript
## Installation
The JavaScript SDK is available as an [NPM package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/algosdk) or as a [minified JavaScript library](https://github.com/algorand/js-algorand-sdk/blob/master/dist/algosdk.min.js). 

Requirements: [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download/) versions TODO: supported version range
```
$npm install algosdk
```

To install the minified library, download the [latest distribution](https://github.com/algorand/js-algorand-sdk/tree/develop/dist) and add it to the project's library location. Use the src tag to specify the location of the library.

```javascript tab="JavaScript"
<script src="algosdk.min.js"/> 
```

The [GitHub repository](https://github.com/algorand/js-algorand-sdk) contains additional documentation and examples.


# Python
## Installation
The Python SDK is available as a [pip package](https://pypi.org/project/py-algorand-sdk/). To install the Python SDK, open a terminal and run the following command:

Requirements: [Python3](https://www.python.org/download/releases/3.0/)

```
$pip3 install py-algorand-sdk
```

Alternatively, choose and download a [distribution file](https://pypi.org/project/py-algorand-sdk/#files), and run 

```
$ pip3 install [file name].
```

The [GitHub repository](https://github.com/algorand/py-algorand-sdk) contains additional documentation and examples.

See the Python SDK [reference documentation](https://py-algorand-sdk.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) for more information on methods.

# Java
## Installation
The Java SDK is available in the [MVN repository](https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/com.algorand/algosdk) and can be used in your Maven project by including the following dependency. 

Requirements: Java SDK requires Java 7+ and Android minSdkVersion 16+.

```
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.algorand</groupId>
    <artifactId>algosdk</artifactId>
    <version>1.2.1</version>
</dependency>
```

The [GitHub repository](https://github.com/algorand/java-algorand-sdk) contains additional documentation and examples.

See the Java SDK [reference documentation](https://algorand.github.io/java-algorand-sdk/) for more information on packages and methods.


# Go
## Installation
The Go SDK is available as a standard package and can be downloaded and installed using the `go get` command as shown below.

Requirements: [Go Programming Language](https://golang.org/dl/) version 1.12.x TODO: based on requirements for `go-algorand` the SDK may be different?

```
go get -u github.com/algorand/go-algorand-sdk/..
```

The [GitHub repository](https://github.com/algorand/go-algorand-sdk) contains additional documentation and examples.

See the Go SDK [reference documentation](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/algorand/go-algorand-sdk) for more information on packages and functions.

Commit message:

Updates to first paragraph in initial draft of SDK overview.

docs/reference/sdks/index.md, after:

title: Overview
Algorand maintains SDK support in [JavaScript](#javascript), [Python](#python), [Java](#java) and [Go](#go). More languages are also available through [Community Provided SDKs](../../community/#sdks). The Algorand SDKs offer both standalone and network-connected development functionality. Browse the full set of supported features and example code in each of the SDKs in the [Features section](../../features/index.md) of the docs. To get started, install your SDK of choice following the installation directions below then visit the [Start Building section](../../build-apps/setup.md) to learn how to send your first transaction.

!!! info
    All examples on this page assume the data directory is ~/node/data

# REST Endpoints
Integration with the Algorand protocol daemon (`algod`), Algorand key management daemon (`kmd`) or Algorand Indexer daemon (`algorand-indexer`) is provided using a set of [REST APIs](TODO:$REST_LANDING_PAGE). These APIs are described using the [Open API Specification version 2 (OAS 2)](https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/blob/master/versions/2.0.md). The `algod` and `kmd` daemons serve their respective API from the _address:port_ defined within the _algod.net_ and _kmd.net_ files found in the _~/node/data_ and _~/node/data/kmd-{version}_ directories. The `algorand-indexer` daemon provides its API from the _host:port_ defined by the _--server_ flag specified at start up. Each daemon provides its API specification in a swagger json format available from this endpoint: 

Algorand Protocol Daemon (`algod`)

```
curl http://$(cat ~/node/data/algod.net)/swagger.json
```

Algorand Key Management Daemon (`kmd`)

```
curl http://$(cat ~/node/data/kmd-v0.5/kmd.net)/swagger.json
```

!!! info
    The `kmd` daemon is only automatically started when using the `goal` command line tool with specific commands requiring key management access. Also, this daemon timeout after 60 seconds being idle. If you require API access to `kmd` you will need to manually start the process with `goal` using the command: `goal kmd start -d <data-dir>`.

Algorand Indexer (`algorand-indexer`)

```
curl http://{host:port}/swagger.json # TODO: This endpoint is not implemented
```

!!! info
    All REST methods and models are fully described within [reference documentation](TODO:$REST_LANDING_PAGE). 


# Security Token
Most REST calls will also require an API token header to authenticate with the API server. For both `algod` and `kmd` the token is automatically generated by the daemon at startup and stored in a file. `algod` places _algod.token_ in the _~/node/data_ directory. `kmd` places _kmd.token_ the _~/node/data/kmd-{version}_ directory. Security tokens can be regenerated for both using the `goal node generatetoken` command. The `algorand-indexer` daemon allows configuration of the security token at startup using the _--token_ flag and specifying a value. 

| Daemon             | Header Identifier   | Header Value Defined Via                      |
| ------------------ | ------------------- | --------------------------------------------- |
| `algod`            | X-Algo-API-Token    | file: ~/node/data/algod.token                 |
| `kmd`              | X-KMD-API-Token     | file: ~/node/data/kmd-{version}/kmd.token     |
| `algorand-indexer` | X-Indexer-API-Token | flag: --token {your_value_here}               |

Each SDKs provides a method for setting these headers. Most REST tools provide a method for setting additional headers. To set the header with a `curl` command use the `-H` parameter. For example, to make a call to retrieve a specific block, use the following curl command:

```
curl http://$(cat ~/node/algod.net)/v2/blocks/31538 -H "X-Algo-API-Token: $(cat ~/node/data/algod.token)"
```

In the above example, the block information will be displayed if the block exists on the local node. If the node is a non-Archival node, older blocks will not be available.
TODO: Consider replacing above example with /v2/status as will always return relevant data

# JavaScript
## Installation
The JavaScript SDK is available as an [NPM package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/algosdk) or as a [minified JavaScript library](https://github.com/algorand/js-algorand-sdk/blob/master/dist/algosdk.min.js). 

Requirements: [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download/) versions TODO: supported version range
```
$npm install algosdk
```

To install the minified library, download the [latest distribution](https://github.com/algorand/js-algorand-sdk/tree/develop/dist) and add it to the project's library location. Use the src tag to specify the location of the library.

```javascript tab="JavaScript"
<script src="algosdk.min.js"/> 
```

The [GitHub repository](https://github.com/algorand/js-algorand-sdk) contains additional documentation and examples.


# Python
## Installation
The Python SDK is available as a [pip package](https://pypi.org/project/py-algorand-sdk/). To install the Python SDK, open a terminal and run the following command:

Requirements: [Python3](https://www.python.org/download/releases/3.0/)

```
$pip3 install py-algorand-sdk
```

Alternatively, choose and download a [distribution file](https://pypi.org/project/py-algorand-sdk/#files), and run 

```
$ pip3 install [file name].
```

The [GitHub repository](https://github.com/algorand/py-algorand-sdk) contains additional documentation and examples.

See the Python SDK [reference documentation](https://py-algorand-sdk.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) for more information on methods.

# Java
## Installation
The Java SDK is available in the [MVN repository](https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/com.algorand/algosdk) and can be used in your Maven project by including the following dependency. 

Requirements: Java SDK requires Java 7+ and Android minSdkVersion 16+.

```
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.algorand</groupId>
    <artifactId>algosdk</artifactId>
    <version>1.2.1</version>
</dependency>
```

The [GitHub repository](https://github.com/algorand/java-algorand-sdk) contains additional documentation and examples.

See the Java SDK [reference documentation](https://algorand.github.io/java-algorand-sdk/) for more information on packages and methods.


# Go
## Installation
The Go SDK is available as a standard package and can be downloaded and installed using the `go get` command as shown below.

Requirements: [Go Programming Language](https://golang.org/dl/) version 1.12.x TODO: based on requirements for `go-algorand` the SDK may be different?

```
go get -u github.com/algorand/go-algorand-sdk/..
```

The [GitHub repository](https://github.com/algorand/go-algorand-sdk) contains additional documentation and examples.

See the Go SDK [reference documentation](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/algorand/go-algorand-sdk) for more information on packages and functions.
